---
title: Mile Markers in Educational technology
layout: post
permalink: mile-markers

---

This was part of an email response to Ed Finn.

Jumping right in, I think that your instinct is absolutely right on this one: if the tone was one that trended toward celebrating the ubiquity of technologies in teaching, I don't think that's at all accurate. Of the Ohio Five, the only one experimenting with online courses (that I know of) is OWU and it's because of financial expedience. Not to say the technologists involved weren't excited about it -- they were -- but it seems to me to be the exception and not the rule of how we're thinking about (as you put it) technology-enhanced courses. And it does not at all surprise me to hear that those who are trending toward this romanticized techno-futurism are also the folks who do not talk about solutions for a "digital divide", whether that has to do with financial or socially-constructed barriers to access and literacy.

If we maybe put some markers down on that "continuum of technology in education" you mentioned, it becomes clearer to me that some of the hardest work will be in making sure that we're all talking about the same things (and qualifying our assertions, e.g. of ubiquity, appropriately).
* I'd note that one marker on this continuum is one in which we're talking about operationalized technologies. This is about technology services; "support" for faculty "teaching with technology." This is a holdover -- a relic, one hopes -- of service models in higher ed where the technologists put "tools" in the hands of faculty and train them to "use" those tools. It's instrumentalized, operationalized technology; technology-as-enhancement. It's a particular set of concerns: a particular kind of faculty buy-in -- trying out new stuff -- and a particular set of monetary concerns -- buying the stuff, training the people.
* Another marker on the continuum involves technology partnerships. This is where, I think, Bill's comments are landing. These are the "scattered faculty and students" who are engaging with technologies and, if they're not flying solo, they're partnering with librarians or technologists to think through their (pedagogical? methodological?) relationship with technology. This isn't to be confused with the service model above, in which the "partnership" isn't a partnership: it's one person keeping the lights on and the stuff working and another person (a "user") working with the stuff. What I'm talking about with "partnership" is instead a more meaningful (and actual) collaboration. It may be the case that the person who's helping the teacher-of-record think through their technologies is *also* the person who keeps said tech running, but that role is by-the-way and not primary. The concern here is the conceptual, cultural reframing of human relationships in higher ed. (That's all.) Making sure that willing partners can find one another and that "partnerships" are truly equitable.
* The final marker I'll lay down here (to stress the metaphor as far as possible), is really the end game, for now: curricular tie-in. Whole majors, minors, or concentrations are designed that model the meaningful integration of technologies and close (liberal arts, humanistic) critical engagement. This involves the other two as a matter of course, and I think it requires that an institution recognize the degree to which technologies and curriculum are intertwined.

This is long and inchoate, but it does seem to me that too many folks -- present company excluded -- get the focus all wrong when they're thinking about these things. And maybe that's just a question of audience: folks whose job it is to buy things and to train people -- and to decide how to allocate actual money -- maybe see things through an operationalized lens. But that's not the question in higher ed anymore. Or it shouldn't be. Those decisions can't be divorced from curricular decisions, and curricular decisions can't be divorced from the concerns of technical infrastructure. Both parties lose autonomy in this model, but was there ever really autonomy? Hasn't this truth always been the case? We just grumble about it. At least by acknowledging it, and planning for it, we can make our processes more transparent, our institutions of higher education stronger, and our relationships more human.

To me, the Next Generation Digital Learning Environment isn't one that's just facilitated by technology, but one that encourages (requires) students' critical engagement with technologies.

-----
More here a later draft:
Jumping right in, I think that your instinct is absolutely right on this one: if the tone was one that trended toward celebrating the ubiquity of technologies in teaching, I don't think that's at all accurate. Of the Ohio Five, the only one experimenting with online courses (that I know of) is OWU and it's because of financial expedience. Not to say the technologists involved weren't excited about it -- they were -- but it seems to me to be the exception and not the rule of how we're thinking about (as you put it) technology-enhanced courses. And it does not at all surprise me to hear that those who are trending toward this romanticized techno-futurism are also the folks who do not talk about solutions for a "digital divide", whether that has to do with financial or socially-constructed barriers to access and literacy.

I just deleted a whole section that felt long and inchoate. The long and short is that it seems to me that too many folks get the focus all wrong when they're thinking about technology in higher ed. Maybe that's just a question of audience: folks whose job it is to buy things and to train people -- and to decide how to allocate actual money -- maybe see things through a lens that focuses on *operationalizing* technology. They're focused on technology as a thing that is external to education itself; it's seen as an appendage, maybe an enhancement, but still something that isn't fundamental to pedagogical practice. It facilitates teaching, mediates teaching, broadcasts teaching.

I want to suggest that this forgets an important part of our digital pedagogies, which is teaching students to critically engage with technologies and to think through technologies. Not, for example, reading and annotating a book on a mobile platform. Those are technologies mediating -- maybe even making better -- time-tested ways of engaging knowledge. I'm talking about asking students to think about the algorithms that give them search results, evan as they use algorithms to "read" at scale. They are already consuming and creating knowledge digitally; I want them actively intervene in these processes.

I fear that I'm not articulating this well. Basically, I think, if I'm weighing in on "state of educational technology in higher education, more specifically in the context of liberal arts colleges," I want to separate the operational questions from, I think, the questions of critical engagement. They have different sets of concerns, but I believe that, if we focus on the latter -- if technologists and librarians and faculty and students are partnering to develop programs, concentrations, majors that examine technology in culture -- then that focus will clarify our view of the former. And the latter is cheap: it just takes thought, elbow grease, and imagination. 

I think you're right, Ed: we're not doing online learning, students don't expect course content to be online. To my mind, those questions are about content delivery that is informed by something other than critical engagement. It's "how can we reach more students" or "how can reach students differently" or even "how can we help students get to content they might not otherwise get to." These are fine questions and often fine goals. But they're not focused on "how do we help students think about the world they live in" or "how do we teach students to be responsible producers of knowledge" or "how do we compel students to be critical consumers of information."

So, yeah, I think folks are getting it wrong. The "Next Generation Digital Learning Environment" won't be defined by how content is delivered, but how students think about "digital" "environments." Maybe that's unique to LACs? I don't know. I think it certainly betrays my own (maybe rosy-tinted) focus.

This has run long, and it's rather soap-boxy and probably not altogether useful. Maybe there's something in here that I should write up in my own article, which might force me to focus!
